A. Vardar, L. Zhang, M. Lupp, A. Rehmer, N. Yadav and T. Kämpfe, "People Counting and Positioning Using Low-Resolution Infrared Images for Resource-Constrained Edge Devices," 2025 14th International Conference on Modern Circuits and Systems Technologies (MOCAST), Dresden, Germany, 2025, pp. 1-5, doi: 10.1109/MOCAST65744.2025.11083958.Abstract: This paper presents a people counting and indoor positioning system using low-resolution infrared video from a thermopile sensor, optimized for deployment on resource-constrained edge devices. A lightweight YOLOv3-tiny network is trained on a custom thermal dataset and enhanced through quantization-aware training and structured pruning. Pre-processing techniques such as Otsu thresholding and morphological filtering are used to suppress noise and reduce image size by over 80 percent with minimal accuracy loss. The final model—quantized to 4 bits and pruned by 50 percent—achieves 57.71 precent mAP at 0.5 while significantly lowering memory and compute demands. Results validate the system's suitability for privacy-preserving, low-power applications in smart environments. keywords: {Training;Performance evaluation;Accuracy;Thresholding (Imaging);Systematics;Quantization (signal);Image edge detection;Computational modeling;Pipelines;Real-time systems;Infrared imaging;people counting;indoor positioning;edge inference;YOLOv3-tiny;quantization;pruning},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=11083958&isnumber=11083724

F. Ghura, K. Poon and U. Ahmad, "Evaluation of Detection and Tracking Approaches for People Counting Using mmWave Radar," 2025 8th International Conference on Signal Processing and Information Security (ICSPIS), Dubai, United Arab Emirates, 2025, pp. 1-5, doi: 10.1109/ICSPIS67605.2025.11318383.Abstract: Accurate and privacy-preserving people counting and tracking is an essential requirement for intelligent environments such as smart buildings, retail analytics, and security monitoring. Traditional camera-based methods provide high resolution, but face challenges related to privacy, illumination, and occlusion, while infrared and ultrasonic sensors suffer from limited robustness. Millimeter-wave (mmWave) radar has recently gained attention as a reliable alternative, offering resilience to lighting and weather conditions and ensuring user anonymity. This paper presents a real-time radar-based people counting and tracking system that integrates different algorithms. A Gaussian probability density function (PDF) based masking method is introduced for clutter suppression and evaluated against Ordered Statistic-Constant False Alarm Rate (OS-CFAR). For detection, both local peak search and Connected Component Analysis (CCA) are investigated, while multi-target tracking performance is compared between Hungarian assignment and DBSCAN clustering approaches. Experimental results demonstrate the trade-offs among these methods, providing insights into the design of practical real-time mmWave people counting systems. keywords: {Weather;Smart buildings;Signal processing algorithms;Lighting;Probability density function;Radar tracking;Real-time systems;Robustness;Millimeter wave communication;Resilience;mmWave;People Counting;PDF;CFAR;CCA;Hungarian algorithm;DBSCAN},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=11318383&isnumber=11318310

S. Papanashi, N. Vasantkumar Hegde, V. Manojith Bhat, R. Bhagya, B. Roja Reddy and S. Patel, "A Lightweight, Real-Time Human Detection and Tracking System for Privacy-Preserving Occupancy Monitoring Using Low-Resolution Thermal Sensors," in IEEE Access, vol. 14, pp. 16306-16325, 2026, doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2026.3658275.
Abstract: Low-resolution thermal array sensors offer an inherently privacy-preserving alternative to camera-based occupancy monitoring, but their low pixel resolution poses significant challenges for accurate human detection and tracking. This paper presents a complete edge-computing solution that not only processes coarse thermal data to extract a reliable people count, but also performs the computation entirely on an ESP32 microcontroller, eliminating privacy risks associated with data transmission, while maintaining real-time performance. Our novel lightweight algorithmic pipeline employs linear interpolation, adaptive thresholding, blob feature extraction, centroid and central-points based tracking and, in addition, a persistence-based algorithm differentiates humans from static heat sources by analyzing micro-movement patterns over time, critically reducing false positives from subjects like lighting, heating, ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC) systems in the field of view. The system’s effective 3-D detection volume and counting capacity are first experimentally mapped to establish precise operational limits. The system is subsequently tested and validated across diverse real-world scenarios including a classroom, an outdoor courtyard area, an indoor confined space, and a library study pod. Our comprehensive evaluation measures count and occupancy accuracies separately over continuous 10-minute periods, achieving a longest consecutive count error of only 28 seconds in the pod. This temporal stability enables near-perfect reliability: any connected decision-making system with a 30-second window achieves correct decisions almost all the time, unaffected by brief count variations. By implementing all processing locally on an ESP32 (520KB SRAM), this work demonstrates that deterministic algorithms can provide a practical, scalable alternative to machine learning approaches for privacy-critical sensing applications, enabling easy deployment in real-world environments without reliance on cloud infrastructure or exposure to privacy risks.
keywords: {Sensors;Thermal sensors;Sensor arrays;Real-time systems;Monitoring;Sensor phenomena and characterization;Pipelines;Microcontrollers;Feature extraction;Heating systems;People counting;thermal array sensor;privacy-preserving sensing;edge computing;AMG8833;human detection;occupancy monitoring;ESP32;grid-EYE sensor;embedded systems},
URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=11366245&isnumber=11323511


W. Phopumyen, W. -P. Fang and S. Ruengittinun, "Wi-Fi CSI-Based People Counting in Obstructed Indoor Environments," 2026 IEEE International Conference on Consumer Electronics - Taiwan (ICCE-Taiwan), Taoyuan, Taiwan, 2026, pp. 91-92, doi: 10.1109/ICCE-Taiwan71481.2026.11652633.Abstract: Device-free people counting using WiFi channel state information (CSI) provides a low-cost, privacy-preserving alternative to camera-based or wearable systems. However, realistic indoor environments introduce significant noise from furniture, electronics, and occupant activities, reducing model reliability. In this work, we propose a 1D convolutional neural network (CNN) classification approach for counting people in a lab environment with cluttered desks, computers, and electronic devices. To validate its effectiveness, the proposed model is compared with several baseline machine learning techniques. This paper incorporates oversampling, class weighting, batch normalization, dropout, and residual connections to improve robustness. Our system achieves a classification accuracy of 0.8662, demonstrating superior performance over traditional baselines, although challenges remain at higher occupancy levels due to complex multipath reflections. These results highlight both the potential and the practical challenges of deploying WiFi-based people counting in real-world settings, and provide a baseline for future research on environment-robust models. keywords: {Modeling;Wireless fidelity;Convolutional neural networks;Interference;Conferences;Accuracy;Machine learning;WiFi sensing;Crowd counting;CNN;Channel State Information},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=11652633&isnumber=11652364

H. Mohammadmoradi, S. Munir, O. Gnawali and C. Shelton, "Measuring People-Flow through Doorways Using Easy-to-Install IR Array Sensors," 2017 13th International Conference on Distributed Computing in Sensor Systems (DCOSS), Ottawa, ON, Canada, 2017, pp. 35-43, doi: 10.1109/DCOSS.2017.26.Abstract: People counting has many applications in smart buildings. For example, adjusting HVAC systems based on the number of occupants in each room can save a significant amount of energy. In addition, security and safety of the building can be managed by determining the number and location of occupants. Different technologies and sensing platforms have proposed for accurate and efficient people counting. However, these solutions are expensive, hard to deploy, or privacy invasive. We investigate the possibility of placing an 8×8 IR array sensor at the doorways and counting the number of people inside rooms. Our solution is real-time, inexpensive, privacy preserving with much less deployment constraints compared to its competitors. The proposed solution deals with realistic and dynamic changes in the sensing environment by leveraging a combination of Otsus thresholding and modeling thermal noise distribution. We evaluated our solution via several controlled and uncontrolled real-world environments. The results show an average of 93% accuracy in estimating the number of occupants in rooms. keywords: {Temperature sensors;Sensor arrays;Buildings;Privacy;Temperature;Estimation;Cameras;People Counting;IR Array Sensors;Indoor Localization},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=8271942&isnumber=8271927

S. Fukui and N. Morimoto, "Wi-Fi CSI-Based Anomaly Detection for Multi-Person Occupancy in Private Rooms," 2026 IEEE 50th Annual Computers, Software, and Applications Conference (COMPSAC), Madrid, Spain, 2026, pp. 1323-1332, doi: 10.1109/COMPSAC69091.2026.00177.Abstract: Detecting multiple occupants in private rooms designed for single-person use is important for safety assurance in privacy-sensitive environments. However, conventional monitoring, such as cameras or dedicated sensors, raises privacy concerns and requires additional hardware. This study proposes a nonintrusive method for multi-person occupancy detection using Wi-Fi Channel State Information (CSI), which can be obtained from existing infrastructure. We formulate the problem as anomaly detection, defining single occupancy as normal and multi-person occupancy as anomalous. This enables training using only singleoccupancy data, eliminating the need to collect multi-person data for each deployment environment. Separate Dense Autoencoders are applied to amplitude and phase components of CSI, and temporal modeling is intentionally excluded to reduce behavioral dependence. Multiple decision strategies are introduced to flexibly adjust detection characteristics. Experimental results demonstrate that models trained solely on single-occupancy data can successfully detect multi-person occupancy. The amplitude-based model achieves stable performance, while the phase-based model exhibits higher anomaly sensitivity. Their combination enables control of the trade-off between normal recognition and anomaly detection. The method shows robustness to unseen activities, though performance is influenced by environmental, positional, and subject differences. These results demonstrate the feasibility of privacy-preserving multi-person detection in single-use private rooms. keywords: {Modeling;Training;Signal detection;Anomaly detection;Wireless fidelity;Learning (artificial intelligence);Timing;Labeling;Printing;Design methodology;Wi-Fi Channel State Information (CSI);Anomaly Detection;Device-Free Sensing;Occupancy Detection;Autoencoder;Privacy-Preserving Indoor Monitoring},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=11645210&isnumber=11645104

A. Martin-Martin et al., "Spiking Neural Networks for People Counting Based on FMCW Radar," in IEEE Access, vol. 13, pp. 60846-60858, 2025, doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2025.3557317.
Abstract: This paper presents an innovative method for indoor people counting using Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs) exclusively with radar data, effectively addressing privacy concerns associated with camera-based systems. When compared to established neural network-based algorithms like VGG16 (F1-Score=0.8003), ResNet50 (F1-Score=0.6669), and MobileNet (F1-Score=0.7258), the SNN (F1-Score=0.8284) exhibits superior performance in the task of counting people indoors. Furthermore, the energy efficiency of the SNN is a strong advantage, particularly for hardware deployment. This characteristic not only reduces computational demands but also aligns with the increasing emphasis on energy conservation in modern technology. The combination of privacy preservation, accuracy, and energy efficiency positions the SNN as a promising choice for a wide range of real-world applications, including security, transportation, and smart spaces, offering a comprehensive solution for people counting in indoor environments.
keywords: {Radar;Sensors;Accuracy;Cameras;Radar antennas;Receiving antennas;Pipelines;Hardware;Feature extraction;Ultra wideband radar;FMCW radar;people counting;spiking neural network},
URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=10947678&isnumber=10820123


H. Said, Y. Khan and E. Gryazina, "CO2-Based Occupancy Detection in Apartments: A Longitudinal Study for Enhanced Indoor Comfort and Energy Efficiency," 2025 IEEE 26th International Conference of Young Professionals in Electron Devices and Materials (EDM), Altai, Russian Federation, 2025, pp. 970-974, doi: 10.1109/EDM65517.2025.11096825.Abstract: This paper presents a sensor-based framework for multi-class indoor occupancy detection using environmental data in a residential setting. Over a 50-day period, continuous measurements of CO2 concentration, temperature, and relative humidity were collected from a residential bedroom. These data were used to train a long short-term memory (LSTM) model to estimate occupancy levels ranging from 0 to 3 individuals. Ground-truth annotations were established using camera footage solely during the data collection phase, ensuring that the deployed system relies exclusively on non- intrusive ambient sensors. The LSTM model achieved a test accuracy of 97.1%, with balanced precision, recall, and F1-scores across all occupancy classes. Detailed analysis of the temporal patterns revealed distinct correlations between occupancy states and fluctuations in environmental parameters, validating the effectiveness of the selected features. The proposed framework supports real-time occupancy inference and offers significant potential for informing adaptive control strategies in heating, ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC) systems. By leveraging ambient sensor data, this approach provides a privacy-preserving, data-driven solution that enhances energy management and improves indoor comfort in residential environments. keywords: {Temperature sensors;Temperature measurement;HVAC;Accuracy;Humidity;Cameras;Energy efficiency;Real-time systems;Long short term memory;Optimization;Occupancy detection;CO2 sensors;smart homes;HVAC optimization;indoor air quality;Energy optimization},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=11096825&isnumber=11096632

D. Chowdhury and M. Chattopadhyay, "Edge-Deployed Infrared-Based Occupancy Estimation for Privacy-Preserving Smart Environments," 2026 International Conference on Computing, Electronics & Communications Engineering (ICCECE), Kolkata, India, 2026, pp. 1-6, doi: 10.1109/ICCECE69715.2026.11492835.Abstract: This study presents a novel, privacy-preserving system for real-time occupancy detection in smart environments using low-resolution infrared (IR) array sensors and edge-deployed convolutional neural networks (CNNs). Unlike conventional camera-based approaches, the proposed system avoids capturing identifiable personal details, ensuring privacy. An optimized CNN processes 8x8 IR sensor data directly on an microcontroller, achieving an accuracy up to 93.87% in classifying occupancy levels with low energy consumption (3–1.3 J per inference). Model quantization and architectural optimization result in CNN configurations that balance accuracy and resource efficiency, ensuring suitability for edge deployment. Experiments validate the system’s effectiveness using a custom dataset, demonstrating inference latencies as low as 12 ms and robust performance across diverse occupancy scenarios. This cost-effective solution highlights the potential of integrating IR sensors with lightweight CNN models. It supports scalable applications in energy-efficient building management, flexible workspace utilization, and enhanced safety compliance in modern smart environments. keywords: {Microcontrollers;Filtering;Microprocessors;System-on-chip;Filters;Circuits and systems;Application specific integrated circuits;Internet of Things;Pixel;Communication systems;Occupancy detection;Infrared Array Sensors;Edge Computing;Privacy-Preserving Sensing;Convolutional Neural Network (CNN)},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=11492835&isnumber=11492787

S. R. V., A. N. Sayed, J. R. Rosas-Bustos, A. Sligar, O. M. Ramahi and G. Shaker, "Quantum-Enhanced Radar Systems for Indoor Occupancy Detection Using Digital Twin Simulations," 2025 IEEE Microwaves, Antennas, and Propagation Conference (MAPCON), Kochi, India, 2025, pp. 1-4, doi: 10.1109/MAPCON65020.2025.11426682.Abstract: This paper introduces a novel approach for indoor human presence detection using Hybrid Quantum Neural Networks (HQNNs) integrated with Digital Twin (DT) radar simulations. By leveraging a 60 GHz Frequency-Modulated Continuous Wave (FMCW) radar, we generate synthetic radar data for various occupancy conditions, marking the first application of quantum machine learning for radar-based human presence detection. Our quantum-enhanced model outperforms classical machine learning models, especially in low signal-to-noise ratios (SNR) and cluttered environments, demonstrating superior robustness with fewer data and parameters. This work highlights the potential of quantum machine learning for radar-based sensing, offering a scalable and privacy-preserving solution for real-time applications in healthcare and security. keywords: {Radar measurements;Neural networks;Radar detection;Machine learning;Radar antennas;Data models;Digital twins;Sensors;Security;Signal to noise ratio;digital twin simulation;FMCW radar;healthcare;hybrid quantum neural networks;quantum machine learning;security},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=11426682&isnumber=11425025

T. Ropitault, A. Sahoo, S. Blandino and N. Golmie, "Overhead-Free People Counting in mmWave Networks Using IEEE 802.11bf Passive Sensing," 2024 IEEE 35th International Symposium on Personal, Indoor and Mobile Radio Communications (PIMRC), Valencia, Spain, 2024, pp. 1-6, doi: 10.1109/PIMRC59610.2024.10817454.Abstract: Accurately assessing the number of people in a room is essential for enhancing operational efficiency, safety, and sustainability, enabling applications such as smart building management, energy conservation, and emergency evacuation planning. Wi-Fi sensing, favored for its privacy-preserving capabilities and the ubiquity of Wi-Fi infrastructure, has become a popular method for such sensing tasks, including people counting. Within this context, our paper introduces a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) model for millimeter wave (mmWave) Wi-Fi people counting, capitalizing on the IEEE 802.11bf amendment, and in particular its passive sensing framework. By evaluating Range-Doppler (RD), Azimuth-Doppler (AD), and AzimuthRange (AR) map representations as inputs, we establish AR maps’ superiority, achieving up to $\mathbf{9 8 . 5 7 \%}$ accuracy for counting up to four individuals. Our solution, free of communication overhead, also minimizes energy consumption and computational requirements, offering a scalable and efficient sensing solution for people counting, which is particularly well-suited for Internet of Things (IoT) devices with limited resources. keywords: {Accuracy;Computational modeling;Sensors;Computational efficiency;Convolutional neural networks;Internet of Things;Millimeter wave communication;Sustainable development;Wireless fidelity;Context modeling;Wi-Fi Sensing;mmWave;IEEE 802.11bf},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=10817454&isnumber=10817156

M. T. Dogan and M. F. KÜÇÜK, "SDR-Based LoRa Sensing for Occupancy Detection and Device-Free Human Activity Recognition Using High-Rate Chirp Emulation," 2026 8th Global Power, Energy and Communication Conference (GPECOM), Naples, Italy, 2026, pp. 1228-1233, doi: 10.1109/GPECOM70462.2026.11578808.Abstract: This paper presents a device-free indoor human sensing framework based on LoRa radio frequency (RF) signals to address privacy and deployment challenges in home monitoring applications. Unlike vision-based or wearable solutions, the proposed approach leverages a software-defined radio (SDR) platform to emulate LoRa chirp transmissions at 868 MHz and to capture raw in-phase and quadrature (IQ) samples for sensing purposes. Two complementary sensing and classification strategies are investigated. In the first approach, a hierarchical sensing framework is employed to sequentially infer room occupancy and subsequently discriminate between sitting and fall activities. In the second approach, activity classification is formulated as a one-vs-rest (OvR) problem, where empty-room, sitting, and fall scenarios are independently distinguished. Experimental results show that fall events exhibit distinct high-energy and high-frequency Doppler characteristics compared to non-critical activities such as sitting, while empty-room conditions result in minimal temporal and spectral variations. The results demonstrate that both hierarchical and OvR-based strategies enable reliable activity classification and fall detection using low-cost hardware, providing a privacy-preserving and contactless solution suitable for continuous indoor monitoring. keywords: {LoRa;Support vector machines;Modeling;Radio frequency;Human activity recognition;Printing;Equations;Accuracy;Labeling;Chirp;Human Activity Recognition;RF Sensing;Micro-Doppler;Software Defined Radio (SDR);LoRa;Privacy-Preserving},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=11578808&isnumber=11578416

R. Das, A. Acharyya, S. Majumdar and G. Srivastava, "Toward Accurate Indoor Air Quality Evaluation: An IoT-Based Hybrid Fuzzy Inference Approach," in IEEE Internet of Things Journal, doi: 10.1109/JIOT.2026.3734800.
Abstract: Indoor Air Quality (IAQ) in educational environments is governed by complex multi-pollutant dynamics and human-occupancy-driven factors that conventional Air Quality Index (AQI) formulations, which report only the maximum single-pollutant sub-index max(IP), are fundamentally unable to represent adequately. This paper presents AirGeniusEdu, a fully deployed, four-tier Internet of Things (IoT) system spanning a multi-sensor edge node (Tier 1: perception), wireless connectivity to a cloud database (Tier 2: network, 99.7% uplink reliability across 7,179/7,200 scheduled transmissions), on-device fuzzy inference (Tier 3: edge intelligence, <120 ms end-to-end latency per epoch), and MQTT-actuated cloud services (Tier 4: application/ actuation) that together realize a complete sense–connect– infer–actuate IoT loop for real-time, occupancy-aware Indoor Air Quality Index (IAQI) estimation. The system contributes three innovations. First, a data-driven, reproducible antecedent-selection methodology grounded in Spearman rank correlation between five pollutants (PM10, CO, NO2, CO2, VOC) and real-time occupancy (|r| > 0.41), rather than expert-defined heuristics. Second, a hybrid Mamdani–Takagi-Sugeno fuzzy inference engine, driven by real-time, privacy-preserving occupancy counts from an ondevice TensorFlow Lite camera model (47 ms/frame, no image data transmitted), and fused via a pessimistic minimum operator, IAQIEff = min(IAQIMamdani, IAQISugeno), grounded in Dubois– Prade possibility theory. Third, empirical validation over five continuous days under four controlled classroom conditions (varying AC state, ventilation, and occupant density), on 24 independent test samples, demonstrating that the minimum-fusion strategy achieves the highest classification accuracy (66.7%) and lowest false-positive rate (34.8%) among three fusion strategies tested, while preserving a perfect recall of 1.000 (zero missed hazardous events) — reducing unnecessary HVAC actuation by an estimated 33% relative to maximum fusion without compromising occupant safety. Critically, during AC-on/closed/occupied conditions, the standard CPCB AQI reported “Satisfactory” (94) while CO2 simultaneously reached 4,924 ppm; AirGeniusEdu correctly classified this condition as Unhealthy/Harmful, demonstrating a safety-relevant blind spot in regulatory single-pollutant indices that occupancy-aware, edge-deployed multi-pollutant fusion directly resolves. These results establish AirGeniusEdu as a robust, interpretable, and IoT-native occupancy-aware IAQ assessment solution suitable for educational institutions and similar built environments.
keywords: {Internet of Things;Modeling;Indoor air quality;Air quality;Fuzzy logic;Timing;Image sensors;Indexes;Indexing;Real-time systems;Indoor Air Quality (IAQ);Air Quality Index (AQI);Air Quality Monitoring System (AQMS);Fuzzy Inference System (FIS);Mamdani Model;Takagi–Sugeno Model;IoT Sensing;Occupancy Detection;Multi-Pollutant Monitoring;Edge Computing;Hybrid IAQI Framework},
URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=11695196&isnumber=6702522


C. Xie et al., "Privacy-preserving Social Distance Monitoring on Microcontrollers with Low-Resolution Infrared Sensors and CNNs," 2022 IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and Systems (ISCAS), Austin, TX, USA, 2022, pp. 1332-1336, doi: 10.1109/ISCAS48785.2022.9937837.Abstract: Low-resolution infrared (IR) array sensors offer a low-cost, low-power, and privacy-preserving alternative to optical cameras and smartphones/wearables for social distance monitoring in indoor spaces, permitting the recognition of basic shapes, without revealing the personal details of individuals. In this work, we demonstrate that an accurate detection of social distance violations can be achieved processing the raw output of a 8x8 IR array sensor with a small-sized Convolutional Neural Network (CNN). Furthermore, the CNN can be executed directly on a Microcontroller (MCU)-based sensor node.With results on a newly collected open dataset, we show that our best CNN achieves 86.3% balanced accuracy, significantly outperforming the 61% achieved by a state-of-the-art deterministic algorithm. Changing the architectural parameters of the CNN, we obtain a rich Pareto set of models, spanning 70.5-86.3% accuracy and 0.18-75k parameters. Deployed on a STM32L476RGMCU, these models have a latency of 0.73-5.33ms, with an energy consumption per inference of 9.38-68.57$\mu$J. keywords: {Quantization (signal);Microcontrollers;Shape;Human factors;Social factors;Convolutional neural networks;Optical sensors;Social Distance;COVID-19;Edge Computing;Infrared Sensors;Convolutional Neural Networks},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=9937837&isnumber=9937203

H. Choi, T. Matsui, S. Misaki, A. Miyaji, M. Fujimoto and K. Yasumoto, "Simultaneous Crowd Estimation in Counting and Localization Using WiFi CSI," 2021 International Conference on Indoor Positioning and Indoor Navigation (IPIN), Lloret de Mar, Spain, 2021, pp. 1-8, doi: 10.1109/IPIN51156.2021.9662572.Abstract: In the field of crowd estimation, most non-visual approaches confine their objective to only crowd counting, whereas there are a number of vision-based researches which can estimate both the number and location of people. By observation, we figured out that the WiFi channel state information (CSI) also contains the potential characteristics for both estimations. In this paper, we propose a user-device-free simultaneous crowd estimation system that enables both crowd counting and localization simultaneously, by WiFi CSI and Machine Learning. The originality of this study is that we leverage the CSI bundles as the source for extracting features that contain characteristics depending on the dynamic state (counting) and static state (localization). By experiments during three different-time sessions, we confirm that we could achieve up to 94% counting accuracy and 95% localization accuracy by k-fold cross-validation. keywords: {Location awareness;Wireless communication;Wireless sensor networks;Indoor navigation;Estimation;Machine learning;Feature extraction;crowd estimation;counting;localization;channel state information;WiFi;device-free;machine learning},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=9662572&isnumber=9662464

C. Xie, D. J. Pagliari and A. Calimera, "Energy-efficient and Privacy-aware Social Distance Monitoring with Low-resolution Infrared Sensors and Adaptive Inference," 2022 17th Conference on Ph.D Research in Microelectronics and Electronics (PRIME), Villasimius, SU, Italy, 2022, pp. 181-184, doi: 10.1109/PRIME55000.2022.9816801.Abstract: Low-resolution infrared (IR) Sensors combined with machine learning (ML) can be leveraged to implement privacy-preserving social distance monitoring solutions in indoor spaces. However, the need of executing these applications on Internet of Things (IoT) edge nodes makes energy consumption critical. In this work, we propose an energy-efficient adaptive inference solution consisting of the cascade of a simple wake-up trigger and a 8-bit quantized Convolutional Neural Network (CNN), which is only invoked for difficult-to-classify frames. Deploying such adaptive system on a IoT Microcontroller, we show that, when processing the output of a $8\times 8$ low-resolution IR sensor, we are able to reduce the energy consumption by 37-57% with respect to a static CNN-based approach, with an accuracy drop of less than 2% (83% balanced accuracy). keywords: {Energy consumption;Adaptive systems;Human factors;Social factors;Energy efficiency;Sensor systems;Internet of Things;Edge Computing;Adaptive Inference;Social Distancing;Energy Efficiency;Infrared Sensor},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=9816801&isnumber=9816743

Z. Xun et al., "SDN-Managed Hidden Device Human Counting Scheme Based on Wi-Fi Perception," in IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 13, no. 8, pp. 17286-17294, 15 April15, 2026, doi: 10.1109/JIOT.2026.3661590.
Abstract: In the Internet of Things (IoT) era, accurate human counting is critical for public safety, intelligent building management, and emergency response, enabling real-time occupancy estimation and rapid decision-making. Current vision-based approaches suffer from blind spots, poor lighting, occlusion, and privacy concerns, while device-based methods require costly dedicated hardware, restricting deployment in large-scale public spaces. Wi-Fi sensing offers a promising alternative due to its nonintrusive and infrastructure-friendly nature. Compared to received signal strength indicator (RSSI)-based methods, channel state information (CSI) offers fine-grained signal features and improved sensitivity to environmental changes, making it more suitable for complex indoor sensing tasks. However, existing CSI-based human counting schemes still struggle with dynamic human behaviors and complex obstacle environments. Therefore, we propose a software-defined networking (SDN)-managed hidden device-free human counting scheme based on Wi-Fi perception, named Hi-Count. CSI is utilized for fine-grained environmental sensing, while SDN is employed for centralized Wi-Fi management. Experiments were conducted in a meeting room and an open hall under three activity scenarios: standing still, walking regularly, and walking randomly. Hi-Count achieved accuracies of 99.8%, 93.8%, and 89.3% in the meeting room and 97.8%, 88.0%, and 78.7% in the open hall, respectively. Compared to other approaches, Hi-Count achieved higher accuracy and robustness, attributed to its low-cost, privacy-preserving design and adaptability, rendering it suitable for applications in smart classrooms, hospitals, and transportation hubs.
keywords: {Wireless fidelity;Accuracy;Long short term memory;Legged locomotion;Internet of Things;Software defined networking;Sensors;Robustness;Real-time systems;Noise;Channel state information (CSI);human counting;software-defined networking (SDN);Wi-Fi perception},
URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=11373234&isnumber=11477814


J. Wetzel, A. Laubenheimer and M. Heizmann, "Joint Probabilistic People Detection in Overlapping Depth Images," in IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 28349-28359, 2020, doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2020.2972055.
Abstract: Privacy-preserving high-quality people detection is a vital computer vision task for various indoor scenarios, e.g. people counting, customer behavior analysis, ambient assisted living or smart homes. In this work a novel approach for people detection in multiple overlapping depth images is proposed. We present a probabilistic framework utilizing a generative scene model to jointly exploit the multi-view image evidence, allowing us to detect people from arbitrary viewpoints. Our approach makes use of mean-field variational inference to not only estimate the maximum a posteriori (MAP) state but to also approximate the posterior probability distribution of people present in the scene. Evaluation shows state-of-the-art results on a novel data set for indoor people detection and tracking in depth images from the top-view with high perspective distortions. Furthermore it can be demonstrated that our approach (compared to the the mono-view setup) successfully exploits the multi-view image evidence and robustly converges in only a few iterations.
keywords: {Probabilistic logic;Cameras;Ambient assisted living;Probability distribution;Three-dimensional displays;Image resolution;Noise measurement;Depth sensor indoor surveillance;depth sensor networks;generative scene model;joint multi-view person detection;mean-field variational inference;multi-camera person detection;people detection in top-view;vertical top-view pedestrian detection},
URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=8985332&isnumber=8948470


J. Rambach, B. Mirbach, Y. Anisimov and D. Stricker, "Time-of-Flight Depth Sensing for Automotive Safety and Smart Building Applications: The VIZTA Project," in IEEE Access, vol. 11, pp. 105819-105829, 2023, doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2023.3320268.
Abstract: Time-of-Flight (ToF) can be an advantageous sensing modality for several indoor applications, used alone or in combination with other sensors such as RGB cameras. As part of the research project VIZTA (Vision, Identification, with Z-sensing Technologies and key Applications), we developed methods using Machine Learning algorithms with ToF depth measurements as inputs to address two key areas of applications, in- car cabin monitoring (person detection and segmentation) and smart building monitoring (person counting and anomaly detection). In this article, we discuss the entire research approach followed in VIZTA, from setting up the experimental environments for collecting data and creating the VIZTA public datasets, to developing Deep Learning algorithms tailored to ToF data, used either in 2D depth map or 3D point cloud format. We discuss the advantages and challenges of using ToF-data, as well as the lessons learned during the evaluation and benchmarking of our methods.
keywords: {Sensors;Cameras;Monitoring;Smart buildings;Three-dimensional displays;Intelligent sensors;Automobiles;Deep learning;Machine learning;Building monitoring;deep learning;detection;in-car monitoring;machine learning;segmentation;time-of-flight},
URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=10266355&isnumber=10005208


R. Mittal, S. Kumar and U. Chugh, "Hybridization of Machine Learning, IoT and Neutrosophic Deep Learning for Reliable Occupancy Estimation for Smart Buildings," 2025 International Conference on Digital Innovations for Sustainable Solutions (ICDISS), Faridabad, India, 2025, pp. 1-5, doi: 10.1109/ICDISS68238.2025.11320659.Abstract: Smart buildings rely heavily on occupancy detection for energy efficiency, comfort and automation. Sensor-based and machine learning methods are commonly confronted with noisy, incomplete, and uncertain perception data. This paper introduces an end-to-end framework that integrates Internet of Things (IoT) based sensing, learning-based analysis and a Neutrosophic Enhanced Convolutional Neural Network (NE-CNN) for privacy-preserving robust occupancy detection. The IoT system architecture has been designed that enables the fusion of multichannel sources and the flexibility to easily integrate novel sensors while classical algorithms as Logistic Regression, SVM or KNN offer insights from baseline performance. To handle the uncertainty and inconsistency in data, NE-CNN incorporates neutrosophic preprocessing along with dedicated convolutional layers which model sensor inputs as truth, indeterminacy and falsity parts. We evaluate our experiments comparing the NE-CNN with traditional ML and benchmark standard CNN in presence of noisy and missing data using benchmarks occupancy datasets. Such a systematic approach improves the robustness, interpretability and scalability for energy-efficient and adaptive environmental control. keywords: {Deep learning;Adaptation models;Smart buildings;Uncertainty;Machine learning;Sensor fusion;Energy efficiency;Sensor systems;Sensors;Convolutional neural networks;Smart Building;Occupancy Detection;IoT;Neutrosophic Logic;CNN;Machine learning;Energy Optimization},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=11320659&isnumber=11320582

H. Sugiura, Y. Fukazawa and M. Ogawa, "Dual Echo State Network for Lightweight Wi-Fi CSI-Based Outdoor Pedestrian Counting With Limited Training Data," in IEEE Access, vol. 14, pp. 146003-146018, 2026, doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2026.3729255.
Abstract: Outdoor pedestrian counting using Wi-Fi channel state information (CSI) is a promising approach for privacy-preserving crowd monitoring. However, practical edge deployment remains challenging because many high-accuracy deep-learning methods require substantial labeled data and computationally costly training. To address this limitation, we propose a Dual Echo State Network (DualESN), a lightweight model that combines two Echo State Network (ESN) reservoirs with different timescales to capture both gradual and abrupt CSI dynamics. We collected Wi-Fi CSI over eight class days on a campus walkway, covering densities from 0 to approximately 180 pedestrians per 30 s, and derived pedestrian-count labels using You Only Look Once (YOLO). We evaluated robustness with limited labeled data using day-wise cross-validation under 7-day and 1-day training conditions. Under the 7-day training condition, DualESN achieved accuracy comparable to several strong baselines, with a training time one to two orders of magnitude shorter than those of the deep-learning baselines. Under the 1-day training condition, DualESN maintained performance comparable to the best-performing baseline, a Temporal Convolutional Network (TCN), in terms of Mean Absolute Error (MAE) and Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE), and significantly outperformed all other baselines in terms of RMSE. Moreover, DualESN required only approximately 1/204 of the TCN training time. In high-density ranges of 81 or more pedestrians per 30 s, DualESN reduced MAE by approximately 34–50% compared with the TCN. These findings indicate that a multi-timescale reservoir design provides a favorable accuracy–training-cost trade-off for edge-based outdoor CSI crowd monitoring.
keywords: {Reservoirs;Modeling;Training;Pedestrians;Labeling;Wireless fidelity;Distance measurement;Timing;Accuracy;Limiting;Channel state information;echo state network;machine learning;pedestrian counting;reservoir computing;Wi-Fi sensing},
URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=11674145&isnumber=11323511


H. Hou, S. Bi, L. Zheng, X. Lin, Y. Wu and Z. Quan, "DASECount: Domain-Agnostic Sample-Efficient Wireless Indoor Crowd Counting via Few-Shot Learning," in IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 10, no. 8, pp. 7038-7050, 15 April15, 2023, doi: 10.1109/JIOT.2022.3228557.
Abstract: Accurate indoor crowd counting (ICC) is a key enabler to many smart home/office applications. Recent development of the WiFi-based ICC technology relies on detecting the variation of wireless channel state information (CSI) caused by human motions and has gained increasing popularity due to its low hardware cost, reliability under all lighting conditions, and privacy preservation in sensing data processing. To attain high estimation accuracy, existing WiFi-based ICC methods often require a large amount of labeled CSI training data samples for each application domain, i.e., a particular WiFi transceiver or background deployment. This makes large-scale deployment of the WiFi-based ICC technology across dissimilar domains extremely difficult and costly. In this article, we propose a Domain-Agnostic and Sample-Efficient wireless indoor crowd Counting (DASECount) framework that suffices to attain robust cross-domain detection accuracy given very limited data samples in new domains. DASECount leverages the wisdom of the few-shot learning (FSL) paradigm consisting of two major stages: 1) source domain meta training and 2) target domain meta testing. Specifically, in the meta-training stage, we design and train two separate convolutional neural network (CNN) modules on the source domain data set to fully capture the implicit amplitude and phase features of CSI measurements related to human activities. A subsequent knowledge distillation procedure is designed to iteratively update the CNN parameters for better generalization performance. In the meta-testing stage, we use the partial CNN modules to extract low-dimension features out of the high-dimension input target domain CSI data. With the obtained low-dimension CSI features, we can even use very few amounts of target domain data samples (e.g., 5-shot samples) to train a lightweight logistic regression (LR) classifier, and attain very high cross-domain ICC accuracy. Experiment results show that the proposed DASECount method achieves over 92.68%, and on average 96.37% detection accuracy in a 0–8 people counting task under various domain setups, which significantly outperforms the other representative benchmark methods considered.
keywords: {Feature extraction;Training;Wireless communication;Wireless sensor networks;Wireless fidelity;Task analysis;Deep learning;Cross-domain detection;few-shot learning (FSL);indoor crowd counting (ICC);WiFi sensing},
URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=9996126&isnumber=10094209


J. Yang, H. Zou, H. Jiang and L. Xie, "Device-Free Occupant Activity Sensing Using WiFi-Enabled IoT Devices for Smart Homes," in IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 5, no. 5, pp. 3991-4002, Oct. 2018, doi: 10.1109/JIOT.2018.2849655.
Abstract: Intelligent occupancy sensing is becoming a vital underpinning for various emerging applications in smart homes, such as security surveillance and human behavior analysis. However, prevailing approaches mainly rely on video camera, ambient sensors, or wearable devices, which either requires arduous deployment or arouses privacy concerns. In this paper, we present a novel real-time, device-free, and privacy-preserving WiFi-enabled Internet of Things platform for occupancy sensing, which can promote a myriad of emerging applications. It is designed to achieve an optimal tradeoff between performance and scalability. Our system empowers commercial off-the-shelf WiFi routers to collect channel state information (CSI) measurements and provides an efficient cloud server for computing via a lightweight communication protocol. To demonstrate the usefulness of our platform, an occupancy detection system is developed by exploiting the CSI curve of human presence. Furthermore, we also design an innovative activity recognition system based on our platform and machine learning techniques with high availability and extensibility. In the evaluation, the experimental results show that our platform enables these applications efficiently, with the accuracy of 96.8% and 90.6% in terms of occupancy detection and recognition, respectively.
keywords: {Internet of Things;Wireless fidelity;Wireless communication;Performance evaluation;Activity recognition;Wireless sensor networks;Channel state information (CSI);human activity recognition;occupancy sensing;WiFi},
URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=8391737&isnumber=8534511


N. H. Motlagh et al., "Measuring the Atmosphere: Environmental Sensing for Occupant Flows in Commercial Spaces," in IEEE Internet of Things Journal, doi: 10.1109/JIOT.2026.3738935.
Abstract: Understanding visitor flows is important for commercial-space management, yet cameras, dedicated counters, and device-based probes create privacy, deployment, and coverage limitations. This paper presents an end-to-end environmental sensing system for scalable, privacy-preserving occupancy monitoring by repurposing existing building sensing infrastructure. We investigate environmental sensing as a low-cost alternative for estimating occupancy trends. We deployed 14 multivariable sensors at Tripla shopping mall in Helsinki, with each sensor operating for up to 79 days. We also co-located an automated people-counting camera with one of the sensors and used its measurements as ground-truth visitor counts. Our sensing study shows that individual variables, particularly CO2, cannot reliably capture rapid occupancy changes because of environmental latency, motivating the fusion of complementary sensing modalities. To efficiently exploit these heterogeneous signals, we develop a compact multi-modal attention-based inference pipeline suitable for resource-constrained edge devices. Under a temporally blocked split setting with disjoint multi-day training, validation, and test periods separated by gap days, the proposed system achieves 76.5% balanced accuracy in classifying Low, Medium, and High occupancy states, compared with 83.7% under a randomized split. Extreme Low-to-High misclassifications account for only 0.12% of test observations. The compact inference pipeline outperforms seven standard baselines under the blocked split setting while requiring only 5,813 parameters (approximately 23 kB), providing a favorable accuracy–model-size trade-off that supports inference on low-power edge hardware. Our ground-truth validation at one location, together with illustrative predictions for other mall zones, demonstrates the operational feasibility of the proposed sensing system in a single commercial building under realistic operating conditions. Overall, these results demonstrate the feasibility of an end-to-end environmental sensing system for computationally scalable and privacy-preserving visitor-count monitoring in commercial buildings.
keywords: {Modeling;Image sensors;Internet of Things;Cameras;Accuracy;Buildings;Windows;Training;Testing;Correlation;Internet of Things;Sensor networks;Sensor deployment;Smart spaces;Indoor measurements;Smart buildings},
URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=11717495&isnumber=6702522


A. Y. Radwan, M. Yildirim, N. Hasanzadeh, H. Tabassum and S. Valaee, "A Tutorial-Cum-Survey on Self-Supervised Learning for Wi-Fi Sensing: Trends, Challenges, and Outlook," in IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 28, pp. 2345-2376, 2026, doi: 10.1109/COMST.2025.3586212.
Abstract: Wi-Fi technology has evolved from simple communication routers to sensing devices. Wi-Fi sensing leverages conventional Wi-Fi transmissions to extract and analyze channel state information (CSI) for applications like proximity detection, occupancy detection, activity recognition, and health monitoring. By leveraging existing infrastructure, Wi-Fi sensing offers a privacy-preserving, non-intrusive, and cost-effective solution which, unlike cameras, is not sensitive to lighting conditions. Beginning with a comprehensive review of the Wi-Fi standardization activities, this tutorial-cum-survey first introduces fundamental concepts related to Wi-Fi CSI, outlines the CSI measurement methods, and examines the impact of mobile objects on CSI. The mechanics of a simplified testbed for CSI extraction are also described. Then, we present a qualitative comparison of the existing Wi-Fi sensing datasets, their specifications, and pin-point their shortcomings. Next, a variety of preprocessing techniques are discussed that are beneficial for feature extraction and explainability of machine learning (ML) algorithms. We then provide a qualitative review of recent ML approaches in the domain of Wi-Fi sensing and present the significance of self-supervised learning (SSL) in that context. Specifically, the mechanics of contrastive and non-contrastive learning solutions is elaborated in detail and a quantitative comparative analysis is presented in terms of classification accuracy. Finally, the article concludes by highlighting emerging technologies that can be leveraged to enhance the performance of Wi-Fi sensing and opportunities for further research in this domain.
keywords: {Wireless fidelity;Sensors;Surveys;Monitoring;Feature extraction;Human activity recognition;Training;Reviews;Integrated sensing and communication;Data models;Self-supervised learning;contrastive learning;non-contrastive learning;sensing;CSI},
URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=11071965&isnumber=11321210


